Expand ZK-rollup developer docs (#6752)
ethereum/ethereum-org-website: src/content/developers/docs/scaling/zk-rollups/index.md

---
title: Zero-Knowledge Rollups
description: An introduction to zero-knowledge rollups, a scaling solution used by the Ethereum community. 
lang: en
sidebar: true
--- 

> Zero-knowledge rollups (ZK-rollups) are layer 2 [scaling solutions](/developers/docs/scaling/) that improve throughput on Ethereum Mainnet through off-chain execution. ZK-rollups process transactions independently, but post state data to Mainnet as `calldata`. They also produce cryptographic proofs of validity for transaction batches to guarantee the correctness of off-chain computation. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Zero-knowledge rollups (ZK-rollups) are layer 2 [scaling solutions](/developers/docs/scaling/) that improve throughput on Ethereum Mainnet by moving computation and state-storage off-chain. ZK-rollups process transactions independently, but post some minimal state data to Mainnet as `calldata`. They also produce cryptographic proofs of validity for transaction batches to guarantee the correctness of off-chain computation. 
```

## Prerequisites {#prerequisites}

> You should have a good understanding of all the foundational topics and a high-level understanding of [Ethereum scaling](/developers/docs/scaling/). Implementing scaling solutions such as rollups is an advanced topic as the technology is less battle-tested and continues to be researched and developed.

Reviewer: I don't think this "prerequisites" statement is super helpful. It's not realkly necessary to understand "all foundational topics" to grasp the basics of ZK_rollups. Also, the second half of the sentence jars for me - basic topics can also be "less battle-tested" and under-researched. It is an advanced topic because it uses frontier technologies that are built on complicated cryptographic primitives. Better to keep it simple IMO.

```suggestion
You should have read and understood our page on [Ethereum scaling](/developers/docs/scaling/). 
```

Author: This is a good point. Although I should point out that other pages on scaling solutions (Plasma, Validium, Optimistic Rollups, etc.) use the same intro. I left it in since it was in the original page (wanted to focus on making what I felt were necessary changes). 

That said, I have PRs open for some of those pages on scaling. Do you want me to update the prerequisites section in those pages with your suggestion, too?

> Looking for a more beginner-friendly resource? See our [introduction to layer 2](/layer-2/).

Reviewer: we just dealt with this in `prerequisites`
```suggestion
```

## What are zero-knowledge rollups? {#what-are-zk-rollups}

**Zero-knowledge rollups (ZK-rollups)** execute transactions on layer 2 (L2), which they bundle (or "roll-up") into batches. ZK-rollup operators produce [validity proofs](/glossary/#validity-proof) to prove the validity of off-chain transactions before submitting batches on-chain. These proofs can come in the form of ZK-SNARKs (Zero-Knowledge Succinct Non-Interactive Argument of Knowledge) or ZK-STARKs (Zero-Knowledge Scalable Transparent Argument of Knowledge). 

> The ZK-rollup smart contract maintains the state of all transactions on the L2 chain, and this state can only be updated with a validity proof. This means that ZK-rollups only need to provide validity proofs to finalize transactions on the layer 1 (L1) chain instead of posting all the transaction data like [optimistic rollups](/developers/docs/scaling/optimistic-rollups/). 

Reviewer: It's a bit early to talk about the "L2 chain" because the overall architecture of a zk rollup hasn't been explained. Suggest including some explicit description and perhaps diagram showing that the rollup is managed by a smart contract on L1 that interacts with some off-chain infrastructure. It should also be noted that "offchain" just means off L1, not necessarily off of any chain.

Author: > There is a lot of good information here but I think it needs restructuring to make sure the information is presented in a logical order. There is a lot of assumed knowledge and concepts that are used in earlier sections before they are defined in later sections. I have tried to point out some specific examples and make some suggestions.

> There is a lot of good information here but I think it needs restructuring to make sure the information is presented in a logical order. There is a lot of assumed knowledge and concepts that are used in earlier sections before they are defined in later sections. I have tried to point out some specific examples and make some suggestions.

I can see where you're coming from, but it'll help to clarify a few points:
- Most of the content in the 'What are ZK-rollups?" section were based on the page's original text. If you can look through it  [here](https://ethereum.org/en/developers/docs/scaling/zk-rollups/#zk-rollups), you'll find many references to "layer 1" and  "layer 2". I merely improved on the original to emphasize some ideas.

- The way I saw it, the intro section "What are ZK-rollups?" would serve as a high-level overview to the concept (the original page had that high-level summary feeling, too). I felt it'd be more useful to have a separate section detailing the low-level operations of ZK-rollups for those interested (instead of overloading readers with descriptions from the beginning). 

- Also, I should point out that the page assumes the reader is already familiar with scaling and L2s (this is recommended in the prerequisites). This fact, and the page's position in the advanced section of the docs, means a high-level overview using terms like "calldata" or "L2 chain" isn't entirely out of place.

Reviewer: ok fair enough. Let's get some other opinions, e.g. @minimalsm. I still think it is better to include some definitions early on so that the page stands alone as much as possible.

> There are no delays when moving funds from ZK-rollups (L2) to Ethereum (L1) because exit transactions are finalized once the ZK-rollup contract verifies the validity proof. Conversely, withdrawing funds from optimistic rollups is subject to a delay to allow anyone to challenge the exit transaction with a [fraud proof](/glossary/#fraud-proof). 

Reviewer: "Finalized" is a loaded term because it is often used in the context of the consensus mechanism to reference a benchmark degree of economic security for a specific block. At the transaction level, perhaps it is better to say it has been "executed" rather than "finalized" to avoid any confusion.
```suggestion
There are no delays when moving funds from ZK-rollups (L2) to Ethereum (L1) because exit transactions are executed once the ZK-rollup contract verifies the validity proof. Conversely, withdrawing funds from optimistic rollups is subject to a delay to allow anyone to challenge the exit transaction with a [fraud proof](/glossary/#fraud-proof). 
```

> ZK-rollups write transactions to Ethereum as `calldata`, which allows anyone to reconstruct the rollup’s state independently. They also use compression techniques to reduce transaction data—for example, accounts are represented by an index rather than an address, which saves 28 bytes of data. On-chain data publication is a significant cost for rollups, so data compression can reduce fees for users.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ZK-rollups write transactions to Ethereum as `calldata`. `calldata` is where data provided in calls to smart contract functions is stored. Information in `calldata` is published on the blockchain, allowing anyone to reconstruct the rollup’s state independently. ZK-rollups use compression techniques to reduce transaction data—for example, accounts are represented by an index rather than an address, which saves 28 bytes of data. On-chain data publication is a significant cost for rollups, so data compression can reduce fees for users.  
```

## How do zk-rollups interact with Ethereum? {#zk-rollups-and-ethereum}

> A ZK-rollup is an L2 chain designed to operate on top of Ethereum’s base layer. The ZK-rollup protocol is managed by smart contracts running on L1, including the main contract that stores rollup blocks, tracks deposits, and monitors state updates. Another L1 contract (the verifier contract) verifies zero-knowledge proofs submitted by block producers. 

Reviewer: see previosu comment - I think this general architecture needs to be explained more clearly.

> Although they operate independently, ZK-rollups directly inherit Ethereum's security guarantees. This makes them safer than scaling solutions, such as [sidechains](/developers/docs/scaling/sidechains/), which are responsible for their own consensus and security properties.  

Reviewer: "inherits Ethereum's security guarantees"

This is a commonly used phrase but it is opaque without some more explanation

Author: I changed it to "derive security from Ethereum", which seems like a less-loaded term (and the following section describes how ZK-rollups derive their security from Mainnet).

ZK-rollups rely on the main Ethereum protocol for the following:  

### Data availability {data-availability}

ZK-rollups publish state data for every transaction processed off-chain to Ethereum. With this data, it is possible for individuals or businesses to reproduce the rollup’s state and validate the chain themselves. Ethereum makes this data available to all participants of the network as `calldata`. 

> ZK-rollups don’t actually need to publish a lot of transaction data on-chain since validity proofs already verify the authenticity of state transitions. Nonetheless, storing data on-chain is still important for many reasons. Putting state data on-chain allows anyone to rebuild the L2 chain's state and produce batches, preventing malicious operators from arbitrarily freezing the chain. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ZK-rollups don’t need to publish much transaction data on-chain because validity proofs already verify the authenticity of state transitions. Nevertheless, storing data on-chain is still important because it allows permissionless, independent verification of the L2 chain's state which in turn allows anyone to submit batches of transactions, preventing malicious operators from censoring or freezing the chain. 
```

> Besides, users cannot interact with the rollup if operators don't publish data on-chain. An inability to access state data means users cannot know the state of their accounts or initiate transactions (e.g., withdrawals) based on state updates.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On-chain is required for users to interact with the rollup. Without access to state data users cannot query their account balance or initiate transactions (e.g., withdrawals) that rely on state information.  
```

## How do zk-rollups work? {#how-do-zk-rollups-work}

### Transactions {#transactions}

Users in the ZK-rollup sign transactions and submit to L2 operators for processing and inclusion in the next batch. In some cases, the operator is a centralized entity, called a sequencer, who executes transactions, aggregates them into batches, and submits to L1. The sequencer in this system is the only entity allowed to produce L2 blocks and add rollup transactions to the ZK-rollup contract.  

Other ZK-rollups may rotate the operator role by using a [proof-of-stake](/developers/docs/consensus-mechanisms/pos/) validator set. Prospective operators deposit funds in the rollup contract, with the size of each stake influencing the staker’s chances of getting selected to produce the next rollup batch. The operator’s stake can be slashed if they act maliciously, which incentivizes them to post valid blocks.  

#### How ZK-rollups publish transaction data on Ethereum {#how-zk-rollups-publish-transaction-data-on-ethereum} 

> As explained, transaction data is published on Ethereum as `calldata`. Calldata is a data area in a smart contract used to pass arguments to a function. Although `calldata` is similar to [memory](/developers/docs/smart-contracts/anatomy/#memory), it isn’t stored as part of Ethereum’s state; rather, it persists on-chain as part of the Ethereum chain's [history logs](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/latest/introduction-to-smart-contracts.html?highlight=memory#logs). This makes it a cheaper alternative to `memory` or `storage` for storing data on-chain. 

Reviewer: See earlier comments- `calldata` has been discussed multiple times already and is only now defined.

Author: This is similar to what I said in the earlier comments: I didn't see a way of properly explaining some concepts like calldata at the beginning without taking a massive detour. The idea was to assume readers (who are likely developers) already know what it meant, and if they didn't, I could explain it properly in the right context. 

For example, this sentence "ZK-rollups write transactions to Ethereum as calldata. `calldata` is where data that is included in external calls to smart contract functions gets stored" may not make an impression on a reader at the beginning since we haven't even explained that the rollup is managed by an L1 contract. 

Going into `calldata` at the transaction phase made sense since readers are already aware of two facts: a. ZK-rollups rely on L1 contracts b. Operators publish data to this contract. Then they can tie both facts in their minds and understand what `calldata` is and why it's necessary.

The rollup transitions to a new state after the execution of a new set of transactions. The operator who initiated the state transition is required to compute a new state root and submit to the on-chain contract. If the validity proof associated with the batch is authenticated by the verifier contract, the new Merkle root becomes the ZK-rollup’s canonical state root. 

Besides computing state roots, the ZK-rollup operator also creates a batch root—the root of a Merkle tree comprising all transactions in a batch. When a new batch is submitted, the rollup contract stores the batch root, allowing users to prove a transaction (e.g., a withdrawal request) was included in the batch. Users will have to provide transaction details, the batch root, and a [Merkle proof](/developers/tutorials/merkle-proofs-for-offline-data-integrity/) showing the inclusion path. 

### Validity proofs {#validity-proofs}

> 

Reviewer: this seems like the right place to bring in STARKs and SNARKs

Reviewer: nice one, thanks for this. Added some links but otherwise I think this does the job.

However, [advances in zero-knowledge technology](https://hackmd.io/@yezhang/S1_KMMbGt#Why-possible-now) are igniting renewed interest in wrapping EVM computation in zero-knowledge proofs. These efforts are geared towards creating a zero-knowledge EVM (zkEVM) implementation that can efficiently verify the correctness of program execution. A zkEVM recreates existing EVM opcodes for proving/verification in circuits, allowing to execute smart contracts. 

Like the EVM, a zkEVM transitions between states after computation is performed on some inputs. The difference is that the zkEVM also creates zero-knowledge proofs to verify the correctness of every step in the program’s execution. Validity proofs could verify the correctness of operations that touch the VM’s state (memory, stack, storage) and the computation itself (i.e., did the operation call the right opcodes and execute them correctly?).

> Projects working on zkEVMs include:

Reviewer: seems like this would fit better at the end with the other lists of links

Author: Yeah. I added a "Who is working on a zkEVM?" section at the end and listed the links there.

| Stores data needed to recover the state on the L1 chain, which guarantees security, censorship-resistance, and decentralization. | Centralized operators (sequencers) can influence transaction ordering.                                                     |         
| Users benefit from greater capital efficiency and can withdraw funds from L2 without delays.              | Hardware requirements may reduce the number of participants that can force the chain to make progress, increasing the risk of malicious operators freezing the rollup's state and censoring users.   | 
| Doesn't depend on liveness assumptions and users don't have to validate the chain to protect their funds. | Some proving systems (e.g., ZK-SNARK) require a trusted setup which, if mishandled, could potentially compromise a ZK-rollup's security model.    | 
| Better data compression can help reduce user fees.                      |                                                                                                      |

>  

Reviewer: I would like to see some discussion about trusted and non-trusted set ups somewhere on this page.

Reviewer 2: e.g. https://vitalik.ca/general/2022/03/14/trustedsetup.html

Author: Yes, I did this in the section on ZK-STARKs.

Author: > e.g.
> 
> * https://vitalik.ca/general/2022/03/14/trustedsetup.html
> * https://zkproof.org/2021/06/30/setup-ceremonies/

Was writing when this comment came in, but the validity proofs section now has a part explaining trusted setups. I also included the second link in the text--looks like we'd the same thing on our minds. :)

Reviewer: thanks @emmanuel-awosika those additions lgtm.

---
title: Zero-Knowledge Rollups

> description: An introduction to zero-knowledge rollups as a scaling solution used by the Ethereum community. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
description: An introduction to zero-knowledge rollups—a scaling solution used by the Ethereum community. 
```
Small preference

### Validity proofs {#validity-proofs}

The new state root that the ZK-rollup operator submits to the L1 contract is the result of updates to the rollup’s state. Say Alice sends 10 tokens to Bob, the operator simply decreases Alice’s balance by 10 and increments Bob’s balance by 10. The operator then hashes the updated account data, rebuilds the rollup's Merkle tree, and submits the new Merkle root to the on-chain contract.  

But the rollup contract won’t automatically accept the proposed state commitment until the operator proves the new Merkle root resulted from correct updates to the rollup’s state. The ZK-rollup operator does this by producing a validity proof, a succinct cryptographic commitment verifying the correctness of batched transactions. 

> Validity proofs allow parties to prove the correctness of a statement without revealing the statement itself—hence, they are also called zero-knowledge proofs. ZK-rollups use validity proofs to confirm the correctness of off-chain state transitions without having to re-execute transactions on Ethereum. These proofs can come in the form of a ZK-SNARK (Zero-Knowledge Succint Non-Interactive Argument of Knowledge) or ZK-STARK (Zero-Knowledge Scalable Transparent Argument of Knowledge). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Validity proofs allow parties to prove the correctness of a statement without revealing the statement itself—hence, they are also called zero-knowledge proofs. ZK-rollups use validity proofs to confirm the correctness of off-chain state transitions without having to re-execute transactions on Ethereum. These proofs can come in the form of a [ZK-SNARK](https://arxiv.org/abs/2202.06877) (Zero-Knowledge Succint Non-Interactive Argument of Knowledge) or [ZK-STARK](https://eprint.iacr.org/2018/046) (Zero-Knowledge Scalable Transparent Argument of Knowledge). 
```

Both SNARKs and STARKs help attest to the integrity of off-chain computation in ZK-rollups, although each proof type has distinctive features. 

**ZK-SNARKs**

> For the ZK-SNARK protocol to work, creating a Common Reference String (CRS) is necessary: the CRS provides public parameters for proving and verifying validity proofs. The security of the proving system depends on the CRS setup; if information used to create public parameters fall into the possession of malicious actors, generating false validity proofs would be a non-trivial task. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the ZK-SNARK protocol to work, creating a Common Reference String (CRS) is necessary: the CRS provides public parameters for proving and verifying validity proofs. The security of the proving system depends on the CRS setup; if information used to create public parameters fall into the possession of malicious actors they may be able to generate false validity proofs. 
```

The ZK-rollup's core architecture is made up of the following components:

1. **On-chain contracts**: As mentioned, the ZK-rollup protocol is controlled by smart contracts running on Ethereum. This includes the main contract which stores rollup blocks, tracks deposits, and monitors state updates. Another on-chain contract (the verifier contract) verifies zero-knowledge proofs submitted by block producers. Thus, Ethereum serves as the base layer or "layer 1" for the ZK-rollup.

2. **Off-chain virtual machine (VM)**: While the ZK-rollup protocol lives on Ethereum, transaction execution and state storage happen on a separate virtual machine independent of the [EVM](/developers/docs/evm/). This off-chain VM is the execution environment for transactions on the ZK-rollup and serves as the secondary layer or "layer 2" for the ZK-rollup protocol. Validity proofs verified on Ethereum Mainnet guarantee the correctness of state transitions in the off-chain VM.

> ZK-rollups are "hybrid scaling solutions"—off-chain protocols that operate independently, but derive security from Ethereum. Specifically, the Ethereum network enforces the validity of state updates on the ZK-rollup and guarantees the availability of data behind every update to the rollup's state. As a result, ZK-rollups are considerably safer than pure off-chain scaling solutions, such as [sidechains](/developers/docs/scaling/sidechains/), which are responsible for their security properties.

Author: I assume "state diffs" means "state updates"? I'd suggest using something simpler like: "As a result, ZK-rollups are considerably safer than pure off-chain scaling solutions, such as [sidechains](/developers/docs/scaling/sidechains/), which are responsible for their security properties, or [validiums](/developers/docs/scaling/validiums/), which also verify transactions on Ethereum with validity proofs, but store transaction data elsewhere."

@jmcook1186 said about not assuming users already know what technical terms, like `calldata` or "state diffs", mean and I agree with it.

ZK-rollups rely on the main Ethereum protocol for the following:

> ### Data availability {data-availability}

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Data availability {#data-availability}
```

## How do zk-rollups work? {#how-do-zk-rollups-work}

### Transactions {#transactions}

Users in the ZK-rollup sign transactions and submit to L2 operators for processing and inclusion in the next batch. In some cases, the operator is a centralized entity, called a sequencer, who executes transactions, aggregates them into batches, and submits to L1. The sequencer in this system is the only entity allowed to produce L2 blocks and add rollup transactions to the ZK-rollup contract.

Other ZK-rollups may rotate the operator role by using a [proof-of-stake](/developers/docs/consensus-mechanisms/pos/) validator set. Prospective operators deposit funds in the rollup contract, with the size of each stake influencing the staker’s chances of getting selected to produce the next rollup batch. The operator’s stake can be slashed if they act maliciously, which incentivizes them to post valid blocks.

#### How ZK-rollups publish transaction data on Ethereum {#how-zk-rollups-publish-transaction-data-on-ethereum}

> As explained, transaction data is published on Ethereum as `calldata`. Calldata is a data area in a smart contract used to pass arguments to a function and behaves similarly to [memory](/developers/docs/smart-contracts/anatomy/#memory). While calldata isn’t stored as part of Ethereum’s state; rather, it persists on-chain as part of the Ethereum chain's [history logs](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/latest/introduction-to-smart-contracts.html?highlight=memory#logs). Calldata does not affect Ethereum's state, making it a cheap way to store data on-chain.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As explained, transaction data is published on Ethereum as `calldata`. `calldata` is a data area in a smart contract used to pass arguments to a function and behaves similarly to [memory](/developers/docs/smart-contracts/anatomy/#memory). While `calldata` isn’t stored as part of Ethereum’s state; rather, it persists on-chain as part of the Ethereum chain's [history logs](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/latest/introduction-to-smart-contracts.html?highlight=memory#logs). `calldata` does not affect Ethereum's state, making it a cheap way to store data on-chain.
```

Figured we could be consistent here as we usually go with `calldata`. @minimalsm @emmanuel-awosika let me know what you think here, if you agree ill suggest changes for the rest of the file for this.

Author: Yeah, that works. I wasn't sure about starting sentences with lowercase letters, but I guess it's necessary here for consistency.

ZK-STARKs are 'transparent', as they can work without the trusted setup of a Common Reference String (CRS). Instead, ZK-STARKs rely on publicly verifiable randomness to set up parameters for generating and verifying proofs.

ZK-STARKs also provide more scalability because the time needed to prove and verify validity proofs increases _quasilinearly_ in relation to the complexity of the underlying computation. With ZK-SNARKs, proving and verification times scale _linearly_ in relation to the size of the underlying computation. This means ZK-STARKs require less time than ZK-SNARKs for proving and verifying when large datasets are involved, making them useful for high-volume applications.

ZK-STARKs are also secure against quantum computers, while the Elliptic Curve Cryptography (ECC) used in ZK-SNARKs is widely believed to be susceptible to quantum computing attacks. The downside to ZK-STARKs is that they produce larger proof sizes, which are more expensive to verify on Ethereum. Also, they don't support recursion, which is key to scaling off-chain compuation with zero-knowledge proofs.

#### How do validity proofs work in ZK-rollups? {#validity-proofs-in-zk-rollups}

> ##### Proof generation {#proof-generation}

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
##### Proof generation
```

I think at this depth of headers the tag isn't parsed so its not necessary.

- A set of intermediate state roots, derived from updating the state root after applying state updates for each transaction (i.e., decreasing sender accounts and increasing receiver accounts).

The proving circuit computes the validity proof by "looping" over each transaction and performing the same checks the operator completed before processing the transaction. First, it verifies the sender's account is part of the existing state root using the provided Merkle proof. Then it reduces the sender's balance, increases their nonce, hashes the updated account data and combines it with the Merkle proof to generate a new Merkle root.

This Merkle root reflects the sole change in the ZK-rollup's state: a change in the sender's balance and nonce. This is possible because the Merkle proof used to prove the account's existence is used to derive the new state root.

The proving circuit performs the same process on the receiver's account. It checks if the receiver's account exists under the intermediate state root (using the Merkle proof), increases their balance, re-hashes the account data and combines it with the Merkle proof to generate a new state root.

> The process repeats for every transaction; each "loop" creates a new state root from updating the sender's account and a subsequent new root from updating the receiver's account. As explained, every update update to the state root represents one part of the rollup's state tree changing.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The process repeats for every transaction; each "loop" creates a new state root from updating the sender's account and a subsequent new root from updating the receiver's account. As explained, every update to the state root represents one part of the rollup's state tree changing.
```

Extra update :)

The zk-proving circuit iterates over the entire transaction batch, verifying the sequence of updates that result in a final state root after the last transaction is executed. The last Merkle root computed becomes the newest canonical state root of the ZK-rollup.

> ##### Proof verification {#proof-verification}

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
##### Proof verification
```

Same deal here

Users enter the ZK-rollup by depositing tokens in the rollup's contract deployed on the L1 chain. This transaction is queued up since only operators can submit transactions to the rollup contract.

If the pending deposit queue starts filling up, the ZK-rollup operator will take the deposit transactions and submit them to the rollup contract. Once the user's funds are in the rollup, they can start transacting by sending transactions to the operator for processing. Users can verify balances on the rollup by hashing their account data, sending the hash to the rollup contract, and providing a Merkle proof to verify against the current state root.

Withdrawing from a ZK-rollup to L1 is straightforward. The user initiates the exit transaction by sending their assets on the rollup to a specified account for burning. If the operator includes the transaction in the next batch, the user can submit a withdrawal request to the on-chain contract. This withdrawal request will include the following:

- Merkle proof proving the inclusion of the user's transaction to the burn account in a transaction batch

- Transaction data

- Batch root

- L1 address to receive deposited funds

> The rollup contract hashes the transaction data, check if the batch root exists, and uses the Merkle proof to check if the transaction hash is part of the batch root. Afterward, the contract executes the exit transaction and sends funds to the user's chosen address on L1.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The rollup contract hashes the transaction data, checks if the batch root exists, and uses the Merkle proof to check if the transaction hash is part of the batch root. Afterward, the contract executes the exit transaction and sends funds to the user's chosen address on L1.
```

However, [advances in zero-knowledge technology](https://hackmd.io/@yezhang/S1_KMMbGt#Why-possible-now) are igniting renewed interest in wrapping EVM computation in zero-knowledge proofs. These efforts are geared towards creating a zero-knowledge EVM (zkEVM) implementation that can efficiently verify the correctness of program execution. A zkEVM recreates existing EVM opcodes for proving/verification in circuits, allowing to execute smart contracts.

Like the EVM, a zkEVM transitions between states after computation is performed on some inputs. The difference is that the zkEVM also creates zero-knowledge proofs to verify the correctness of every step in the program’s execution. Validity proofs could verify the correctness of operations that touch the VM’s state (memory, stack, storage) and the computation itself (i.e., did the operation call the right opcodes and execute them correctly?).

> The introduction of EVM-compatible ZK-rollups is expected to help developers leverage the scalability and security guarantees of zero-knowledge proofs. More importantly, compatibility with native Ethereum infrastructure means developers can build zk-friendly dApps using familiar (and battle-tested) tooling and langugages.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The introduction of EVM-compatible ZK-rollups is expected to help developers leverage the scalability and security guarantees of zero-knowledge proofs. More importantly, compatibility with native Ethereum infrastructure means developers can build zk-friendly dapps using familiar (and battle-tested) tooling and languages.
```

Spelling fix, and changed dApps -> dapps for consistency with rest of the site.

1. **State write**: There is a fixed cost for writing to Ethereum’s state (i.e., submitting a transaction on the Ethereum blockchain). ZK-rollups reduce this cost by batching transactions and spreading fixed costs across multiple users.

2. **Data publication**: ZK-rollups publish state data for every transaction to Ethereum as `calldata`. Calldata costs are currently governed by [EIP-1559](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-1559), which stipulates a cost of 16 gas for non-zero bytes and 4 gas for zero bytes of calldata, respectively. The cost paid on each transaction is influenced by how much calldata needs to be posted on-chain for it.

3. **L2 operator fees**: This is the amount paid to the rollup operator as compensation for computational costs incurred in processing transactions, much like miner fees on Ethereum.

4. **Proof generation and verification**: ZK-rollup operators must produce validity proofs for transaction batches, which is resource-intensive. Verifying zero-knowledge proofs on Mainnet also costs gas (~ 500,000 gas).

> Apart from batching transactions, ZK-rollups reduce fees for users by compressing transaction data. You can see [here](https://l2fees.info/) for a real-time overview of how it costs to use Ethereum ZK-rollups.

Author: This makes sense. Totally agree with it.

### Recursive proofs {#recursive-proofs}

An advantage of zero-knowledge proofs is that proofs can verify other proofs. For example, a single ZK-SNARK can verify other ZK-SNARKs. Such "proof-of-proofs" are called recursive proofs and dramatically increase throughput on ZK-rollups.

Currently, validity proofs are generated on a block-by-block basis and submitted to the L1 contract for verification. However, verifying single block proofs limits the throughput that ZK-rollups can achieve since only one block can be finalized when the operator submits a proof.

Recursive proofs, however, make it possible to finalize several blocks with one validity proof. This is because the proving circuit recursively aggregates multiple block proofs until one final proof is created. The L2 operator submits this recursive proof, and if the contract accepts it, all the relevant blocks will be finalized instantly. With recursive proofs, the number of ZK-rollup transactions that can be finalized on Ethereum at intervals increases.

### Pros and cons of zk-rollups {#zk-rollups-pros-and-cons}

> | Pros                                                                                                                                                                                                  | Cons                                                                                                                                                                                               |

Reviewer 3: The table seems to be rendering in a way where the pros column is much narrower than the cons. Not a blocker, but if we know a way to sort this out would be nice.

Author: Hm. I'll check the doc and see if I can fix it.

| ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Validity proofs ensure correctness of off-chain transactions and prevent operators from executing invalid state transitions.                                                                          | The cost associated with computing and verifying validity proofs is substantial and can increase fees for rollup users.                                                                            |
| Offers faster transaction finality as state updates are approved once validity proofs are verified on L1.                                                                                             | Building EVM-compatible ZK-rollups is difficult due to complexity of zero-knowledge technology.                                                                                                    |

> | Relies on trustless cryptographic mechanisms for security, not the honesty of incentivized actors as with [optimistic rollups](/developers/docs/scaling/optimistic-rollups/#optimistic-pros-and-cons) | Producing validity proofs requires specialized hardware, which may encourage centralized control of the chain by a few parties.                                                                    |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| Relies on trustless cryptographic mechanisms for security, not the honesty of incentivized actors as with [optimistic rollups](/developers/docs/scaling/optimistic-rollups/#optimistic-pros-and-cons). | Producing validity proofs requires specialized hardware, which may encourage centralized control of the chain by a few parties.                                                                    |
```

Just throwing period on at end :)

- **[Applied ZKP](https://github.com/privacy-scaling-explorations/zkevm-specs)** - _Applied ZKP is a project funded by the Ethereum Foundation to develop an EVM-compatible ZK-rollup and a mechanism for generating validity proofs for Ethereum blocks._

- **[Scroll](https://scroll.io/blog/zkEVM)** - _Scroll is a tech-driven company working on building a native zkEVM Layer 2 Solution for Ethereum._

- **[Polygon Hermez](https://docs.hermez.io/zkEVM/architecture/introduction/)** - _Hermez 2.0 is a decentralized ZK Rollup on the Ethereum mainnet working on a zero-knowledge Ethereum Virtual Machine (zkEVM) that executes Ethereum transactions in a transparent way, including smart contracts with zero-knowledge-proof validations._

## Further reading on ZK-rollups reading {#further-reading-on-zk-rollups}

- [What Are Zero-Knowledge Rollups?](https://coinmarketcap.com/alexandria/glossary/zero-knowledge-rollups)
- [EthHub on zk-rollups](https://docs.ethhub.io/ethereum-roadmap/layer-2-scaling/zk-rollups/)
- [STARKs vs SNARKs](https://consensys.net/blog/blockchain-explained/zero-knowledge-proofs-starks-vs-snarks/)
- [What is a zkEVM?](https://www.alchemy.com/overviews/zkevm) 

> - [More on layer 2](/layer-2/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [More on layer 2](/layer-2/)
-[ZK-SNARKS under the hood](https://vitalik.ca/general/2017/02/01/zk_snarks.html)
-[How are SNARKs possible?](https://vitalik.ca/general/2021/01/26/snarks.html)
```

<RollupProductDevDoc rollupType="zk" />

> ## Aztec Network 

Reviewer 3: Im going to remove these and add the information in a separate PR for adding Aztec and Hermez. That way they will be apart of the RollupProductDevDoc list :)
